TIBCO iProcess and Business Works are very easy to work with ONCE you have everything set up. The big catch is ONCE. Especially when you are trying to set it up in an environment which is not supported (i.e. Windows 7 and MS SQL Express 2008).ENVIRONMENT SETUPOS: Windows 7Database: MS SQL Express 2008.Tibco: Active Matrix Business Works 5.7, iProcess Engine 11.1.0, Business Works iProcess Plugin 11.0.1Connecting iProcess with Business Works requires the TIBCO Technology Plug-in (specifically the Business Works iProcess Plugin).Once you install the plug-in you will see iProcess components on your Business Studio palette.CREATING A CONNECTIONTo work with iProcess you need to create an iProcess connection. It has a very helpful option to 'test' the iProcess connectivity. I would recommend creating a connection and using the connectivity test feature before you start any EAI project involving iProcess and BW.If you get 'icudt36' or any other 'UnsatisfiedLinkError' you might be missing the location of the iProcess plug-in related files from your Windows PATH environment variable. All the required libraries for iProcess can be found in the business works plug-in directory within the bin sub-directory (e.g. tibco\bw\plugins\bin). The second issue you might face, if you have selected 'auto config' in the Database Connection tab,  is regarding 'database connection information' not being sent to the client. If you have tried setting DB connection information to 'enabled' in the User tab in the iProcess Object Server configuration utility 'SWEntObjSvCfg' and still no luck then you need to get into the Windows Registry and edit the settings there. The settings can be found in 'Staff EntObj Server' key. Locate your node and then set 'DBConnectionAccess' string data to '1' if it is set to '0'.STARTING AN iPROCESS CASE and CASE MANAGEMENTOnce you are able to connect to an iProcess engine the next thing is to start/stop cases and in general do some 'case management'.You might face problems related to 'Distributed Management Objects' (e.g. error BW-iProcess-001001) then you need to get 'Microsoft SQL Server 2005 Backward Compatibility Components' which contains the DMO component and ensure that the 'swpr'o (or whichever database user you set up for iProcess) has sysadmin role in the database.You may need to change the SQL configuration to enable OLE Automation using 'sp_configure' and change execution permissions for certain stored procedures if you get errors related to 'not being able to execute stored procedure...'.