Part 1: HerePart 3: HereIMPORTANT ADVICE IS IN ITALICSThere are several stages (as mentioned before):1) The Initial Call2) Pre-interview Phase3) Post-interview Phase4) Finalization Phase5) Bye-bye! The Pre-interview PhaseIf the client likes your CV the consultant will contact you to arrange an interview date. Most companies reimburse rail ticket costs especially if the interview is in London. Make sure, before you select a date and time, you confirm whether your travel expenses will be reimbursed. Also find out the duration of the interview so that you can plan your return journey. This is especially important if you are working.The consultant will also send you a detailed interview description and call you up to find out if you are all set for the interview. Make sure you know the location of the company and other logistic details.Make sure you cover all the points and if you are at all confused by anything related to the interview (from the nature of the interview to what kinds of clothes you should wear), don't feel shy and ask the consultant!The consultant might want to meet with you before the interview. Try and meet as this may allow the consultant to give you some important tips before the interview.The Post-interview PhaseThe consultant will surely call you after the interview is over to discuss with you how it went and what you thought of the company. Make sure you are honest. Sometimes a consultant might be able to get you through to the next round if they have some influence with the company.This is the second most important phase. Here most consultants change sides. Now they will push you hard to accept the job, provided obviously that you clear all the interviews (especially if there are mutliple rounds of interviews). Make sure that you are comfortable with the job and the company.Most probably you would have visited the offices of the prospective employer and seen the work environment during the interview. By now you should have a good idea of whether this is the way ahead for your career or not.Be very clear and honest with the consultant. Don't come under pressure and remember your consultant will show you the positive side of taking up the job. You have to find out the negatives and balance it out with the positives to ensure it is the right move for you!If you are confused TAKE SOME TIME TO THINK ABOUT THE JOB OFFER! Every consultant will give you time to think but just remember that most consultants will expect a definitive yes or no afterwards. Finalization Phase and Bye-bye!If you accept the offer the consultant will keep you updated as to what is required next. There might be some paperwork or a meeting with the employer and consultant. This is usually the shortest phase and the consultant's work is almost done.Most consultants remain in touch at least till you start at the new place. They might get in touch later if there are any issues or just to take feedback from you about the job and to find out if all is going well.