The 'terrorist' attacks have become painfully regular. Another thing that has become painfully regular is the Government of India (and the various State Governments) being caught with their pants down.There is now talk of establishing four more NSG hubs across India to deal with such terror attacks (especially because the NSG took 9.5hrs to arrive on the scene in Mumbai) in the future. I mean you could have sent commandos from UK in that much time! That is like increasing the dose of the medicine just because you cannot find any other way of attacking the disease.What about improving the quality of the State police?What about providing them with automatic weapons and bulletproof jackets instead of new cars.What about improving the physical fitness of the police so that they are capable of doing something more than just relax at the Police checkpost?What about improving coordination between the different agencies both at the State and Central level?What about spending money to buy things like unmanned aerial surveillance platforms to patrol deserted stretches of the coastline?On the political front the so-called 'unified face of politics', which Mr. L. K. Advani talked about before highlighting the fact that the attacks pointed towards the total failure of 'State and Central administrations', did not last long. In fact it did not even last 2 full days. How could it when some of the largest states in India (such as Rajasthan. Jammu and Kashmir, Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh) are going in for State elections? In fact these attacks couldn't have come at a better time for the parties currently sitting in the opposition. Delhi (where voting took place on the 29th of November) got hit by a series of bomb blasts recently. Looking at what happened in Mumbai I am sure the people of Delhi are not going to be very happy with the current State government.RSS has also grown silent after the attacks in Mumbai. I think they have conveniently forgotten how they were targetting non-Marathi Indians working in Maharashtra till about two weeks ago. It is parties like these which must be inspiring the terrorists. I mean if we start attacking our own people surely troublemakers from abroad are going to be able to find at least a few friends there! We should remember that the Central Government controls approximately 5,00,000 crore Rupees through the budget. I am sure everyone wants a crack at that.The people of India can only respond in one way. The only way which will ensure that the political parties learn a good lesson. Demand the immediate resignation of the Chief Minister of Maharashtra along with all the Ministers responsible for security and saftey of the population. Shivraj Patil the Union Home Minister resigned. That is not enough. There should be legal proceedings against him and it should be ensured that he does not hold any position in any elected body in India ever again.Similarly there should be negligence proceedings against all the associated Ministers and administrators. That is the only way they are going to learn.But none of this will happen. I dream of this.. that is why I am the constant dreamer... waiting for the day these dreams turn to reality.