It is encouraging to see availability of recyclable packaging such as plastic wrappers, cans and food containers. But we see the problem of incorrect disposal, littering and lack of waste segregation everywhere (here I believe developed and developing countries are alike).What incentive can the public be given to not only correctly dispose off their litter but also to pick up after others?One common method has been the use of bottle/can bank where you return empty bottles and/or cans and you get some money in return.My idea is to extend this and making it streamlined. Concept is simple.Prerequisites:All packaging to be uniquely identified using RFID/barcode/QR code etc. - this should identify the source of the packaging and the unique package itself. Something like a bar-codeEveryone buying packaged items has a Recycle Card (app or physical)(Optional) People buy items using electronic cash (e.g. credit cards) - to attach personal detailsProcess:Person scans the item (and the package code is also scanned alongside) - over time these could be the same code.Alongside the bill, a full list (electronic) is provided on the app for Recycle Card of all the packaging you have purchased (when you purchased the product).The 'value' of that packaging in terms of the local currency will also be shown.Upon successfully recycling the packaging, a part of that 'value' will be credited to the person. This can be a monthly or weekly process.Any litter found is scanned. The full 'value' along with a small fine is debited from the associated Recycle Card. The Recycle Card of the person who found the litter and correctly disposed it gets a small credit applied to it.This means we recognise the value (in terms of money) of the packaging and not just the contents. This I believe is partially happening where 'green' products with innovative packaging attract a premium prices. Furthermore we should attach a loss (again in terms of money) with improper disposal of the packaging. That is done only through fines but without direct accountability.Key Factors:There are two important steps here:Detecting successful disposal: This should be automated probably at the recycling centre some sort of machine which can scan and tally the packaging and indicate which Recycle Card should be credited. Packaging is unlikely to arrive intact at the Recycling centre. Therefore multiple markers need to be provided. RFIDs are a good solution but may be too expensive for regular use. One option is a dye that exhibits florescence under certain light. This would give a code that can be detected using machine vision. This is similar to the Automatic Number Plate Recognition software that has become very popular at parking lots, toll plazas and petrol pumps. Registration of the Recycle Card: This should be a global system. Mainly because the problem of plastics and other packaging materials will impact everyone. Especially if these end up in our Oceans. People should be obligated to correctly dispose packaging where-ever they are in the world. Those who do so should be rewarded and those who don't penalised. To ensure this - every pieces of packaging must be uniquely identified. This is a big task and I am sure there will be manufacturers (perhaps small/medium sized ones or from the informal sector) who will no follow this system (at least in the beginning due to cost etc.). But the idea is to target the 80% before we target the 20%. In the sense that big companies like Unilever, Nestle, etc. and fast-food joints like McDonalds have the capacity to upgrade their packaging. These are also mass-consumption products. So it would have a noticeable impact.Do let me know what you think about this idea!Somewhere in there there are few good machine learning and big-data use-cases. :)