Netherlands from air looks like an island. Instead of roads in between fields they have canals. The entire country is built on water.UK is famous for its BAD weather. It is cold and damp.Both countries today are counted amongst the worlds most developed countries.People will point to their colonial past as the source of their wealth. But these countries did not always have these colonies. The colonies were built up with strength and resolve. It is not easy to conquer and command people halfway around the world.These countries had similar problems as India. Problems related to oppression of poor, caste system, superstition, domination of religion and wars.As time passed the fate of these countries diverged from that of India. We became the shoe on their foot. The diamond in their crown.What could be the reason?Maybe it was the lack of a global point of view?Maybe it was something to do with looking for short term riches over the long term benefit of the people.Maybe dictatorship and rule of kings went on for a decade longer than it was supposed to?Maybe the politicians and industrial elite took over from the rulers of old to exploit people? But the same happened to Germany that to not once but twice.What could it be then?Could it then be the inability of India to control its population growth? It could certainly be a major factor. Bigger the car more powerful an engine it needs. Furthermore more passengers on board lesser is the efficiency of the engine.Where to go from here?Start a one child policy like China?Or better educate people so that they understand the advantages of a small popultation?Evidence from Kerala indicates the second option is just as good (if not better) than the first. Kerala's population growth stands around 1.8 which is similar to that of China but a whole lot less than the National average for India.Kerala also boasts of 99% literacy.This means education has a clear link with population growth which in turn has a major effect on economic and civic growth of the country.If the equation is so simple again I ask... Why not us?