From there, they mandated to kill indiscriminately, particularly white foreign tourists, and spare Muslims split up into five batches. Click here for the article. There are a few questions that came to my mind, being a citizen of India, after the Mumbai incident:1) How can you shoot people 'indiscriminately' while making sure Muslims are spared? Is it written on a persons face whether they are Hindu or Muslim? Do they check their passports before shooting them 'indiscriminately'?2) How can the press be so irresponsible? How can they start launching the 'religious' angle so quickly.3) What was Narendra Modi doing at Oberoi Trident? Did he go there to look at the building out of curiosity? Was he there to look at his handiwork? But mostly why did he go to a sensitive area and further pressurise the security service to give him cover.4) How come three top cops in Mumbai were shot by terrorists? What were they doing there? How did the terrorists get so lucky? How come one of them was involved in investigating the Malegaon blasts where a 'Hindu terrorism' plot was being revealed.5) Why did the NSG and Army not stabalize the area where the terrorists were hiding instead of just rushing in? Why did they not try and buy time to further investigate the situation? This has been suggested by security experts throughout the world not just me.6) When the Indian Airlines flight was hi-jacked (IC-814) during the BJP government  how come they decided to negotiate and then release the prisoners? This time how come there were no negotiations? Not even to stall for time to allow the forces to prepare?7) Did BJP help out the terrorists back then and now the terrorists are helping out BJP by creating chaos just before general elections and by killing of people who were investigating acts of 'Hindu terrorism'. This operation could surely not have been done without inside help. Landing a boat with arms and so many people on the Mumbai coast is surely not a joke. Advani said this operation must have required 2 months or so of planning. That is what came out in the investigations!8) We must remember that who could be the best friend of Hindu hardliners? Obviously Muslim hardliners. If there are no Muslim hardliners then there is no justification for Hindu hardliners. So obviously they are going to help each other. If we remember that in India Hinduism is not just about religion it is also about the Central and State Goverments and access to billions of rupees.Who is going to answer all these questions? The media? Nope they are busy selling their news. The politicians? Now ways can we trust them.Where do we go to get these questions answered?