Terrorism is being defeated. Step by step. Blast by blast.Earlier the targets were important locations and people. Bombs were hidden in briefcases, cars and often carried by terrorists on their person.Now targets are common places and the general population. Bombs are hidden in garbage bins.This shows how terrorists are unable to target those in power. So now they target those being controlled by the people who have power. If you can't attack the masters then attack the slaves.What they don't realise is that the slaves have enough problems. Another few people being blown to bits is not going to affect them. As a friend said: 'People have to work so that they can earn money and feed themselves and their families'.India is not a welfare state where people have the option of living of the state. So people have developed thicker skins. They need to go out and struggle every day. If that involves dealing with killer Blue-line buses, corrupt Government machinery, pathetic hospitals or toxic ground-water then so be it. Add to that a terrorist bomb... who cares!A terrorist bomb can kill you once. Bad water kills you day by day. Bad electricity supply creates stress minute by minute and the slow machienary of the Government grinds any left over life to bits over a lifetime.Who need to fear the terrorists the most? People who are not struggling out there. People in power. People sitting on a pile of money which was earned under the table.A friend of mine asked me (in anger): 'Why should we be killed by a terrorist bomb?'In my view the only way you can decide how you will die is if you commit suicide. Then also not all methods of commiting suicide are failsafe.Terrorism is a mental disease. You have to be insane if you can kill innocent people. Like some diseases it can be cured. Like other diseases it can kill. In the end life goes on. Nothing can stop it. That is why terrorism fails especially in a country like India. Nothing grounds to a halt. The Americans, in the biggest act of terror, to date, dropped nuclear bombs on Hiroshima AND Nagasaki (in Japan) resulting in large number of civilian casualties. Today Japan is one of the most advanced countries out there.That is one thing the terrorists have understood. That is why terrorism is a failed concept.  